---
date: 2024-01-25
---

As described in [[Paper - Dahlberg 2011 -  Re-constructing digital democracy]], the liberal-individualist digital democracy is based on the idea of the subject being the rational economic man, having direct access to information online, and being able to make voting decisions based on that information. [[The liberal-individualist position on digital democracy has become the de facto default]]

Dahlberg argues that a lot of online activism is based on this model (for a different model of online activism, see [[Counter-publics digital democracy]]):

>This liberal-individualist position is being advanced through a range of local and national government e-democracy initiatives (see examples in Chadwick, 2009, and at Steven Clift’s site at http://www.publicus.net/), as well as through commercial sites (for example, australianpolitics.com, speakout.com, vote.com), corporate media-politics sites (in particular, corporate news sites providing ‘public opinion’ polling and ‘have your say’ comment systems), ‘independent’ e-democracy projects (for example, calvoter.org, mysociety.org, theglobalvote.org, votinginfoproject.org, vote-smart.org, 2gov.org), and civil society practices (for example, Amnesty International, Avaaz.org, Avaaz’s parent Moveon.org, and Avaaz’s founding partner Getup!). 

On 'marketplace of ideas' and reliance on representative government:

>Democracy here becomes the expression and aggregation of the wills of individuals, and the competition between representatives for these individuals’ support. The vision is of a ‘marketplace of ideas’ (London, 1995: 45). The free transmission of information is necessary here for the liberal-individualist subject to make their strategic cost–benefit calculations and choices. As a result, the position aims to promote and protect the ‘rights’ of this subject to freely partake in communication and to encourage the provision of systems that allow for the maximization of information flows and the registration of choices. Digital media are seen as particularly important as they are believed to already function as reasonably independent of centralized controls, although digital-liberty groups like the Electronic Freedom Foundation are working to ensure such independence is safeguarded. 
>
>The position embraces digital media for enabling and enhancing direct individual-representative communication. It looks to bypass state, corporate, political party, and lobby group interference in this individual-representative relationship. However, it does not go so far as cyber-libertarianism, which celebrates an online democracy free of representative government (see Dahlberg, 2010). As such, the liberal-individualist position promotes the realignment of current democratic systems, drawing upon liberal democratic ideals to advance digital media’s facilitation of bottom-up, individual participation in democracy. Because such ideals tend to be hegemonic in many places, the liberal-individualist position is often embraced without regard for other digital democracy possibilities, ...